GWEN IFILL: Good evening.
I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: On the "NewsHour"
tonight:
BILL DE BLASIO (D), Mayor of New
York: We
have every right to believe this
was an act
terror.
GWEN IFILL: Security on high
alert.
After a shoot-out, police take a
suspect into
custody that they believe was
behind bombings
in New York and New Jersey.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Also ahead: how
the presidential
candidates are responding to the
attacks -- a
look at their plans to protect
the nation
from increasing threats.
GWEN IFILL: Plus: New Librarian
of Congress
Carla Hayden takes over at one
the world's
largest repositories of art and
culture.
CARLA HAYDEN, Librarian of
Congress: There
is a hunger in this digital age
to hear authors
together, to participate in
programs, to just
be in a place, a community
space.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
GWEN IFILL: They say they have
got their man.
Now they're trying to figure out
his motive.
An arrest this morning in New
Jersey has ended
a manhunt in a series of
bombings and attempted
bombings around New York City
and New Jersey.
MAN: That's definitely him.
GWEN IFILL: Ahmad Khan Rahami
was loaded into
an ambulance, bloody and dazed
after a gun
battle with police.
The 28-year-old naturalized U.S.
citizen from
Afghanistan was captured in
Linden, New Jersey,
after he was recognized sleeping
in the doorway
of a bar.
That was just hours after police
sent text
alerts to millions in the New
York metro area
to be on the lookout for him.
After the shoot-out, in which
two police officers
and the suspect were injured,
New York City
Mayor Bill de Blasio firmly
labeled the bombings
terrorism.
BILL DE BLASIO (D), Mayor of New
York: We
have so more much information
obviously than
we even had a few hours ago.
Based on the information we have
now, we have
every reason to believe this was
an act of
terror.
GWEN IFILL: It all began on
Saturday morning
in a bomb attack in the beach
town of Seaside
Park, New Jersey, before a
charity race to
benefit Marines.
No one was injured there.
Later that night, in the Chelsea
neighborhood
of Manhattan, another bomb went
off, injuring
29 people.
Surveillance video allegedly
caught Rahami
planting the device.
A second device, made from a
pressure cooker
filled with shrapnel, was found
undetonated
a few blocks away.
And last night, five more pipe
bombs were
found at a train station in
Elizabeth, New
Jersey.
As robots worked to dismantle
them, one exploded
suddenly.
Officials linked all of the
attacks to Rahami,
but offered limited details
about how they
made that connection.
But, with Rahami as a named
suspect, police
descended on his family home in
Elizabeth.
MAN: He's a very friendly guy.
That's what's so scary.
It's hard when it's home.
They never seemed out of the
ordinary.
They were just Americanized.
You would have never known
anything.
GWEN IFILL: At a midday press
conference,
an FBI official said the agency
cannot yet
say why Rahami planted the
bombs, but that
he appeared to have acted alone.
BILL SWEENEY, FBI: I have no
indication that
there is a cell operating in the
area or in
the city.
The investigation is ongoing,
so, as we develop
more information, we continue to
go.
But I have no indication that
there is a cell
operating here.
GWEN IFILL: President Obama
weighed in from
New York, where he's attending
the United
Nations General Assembly.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
Even as we have to be vigilant
and aggressive,
both in preventing senseless
acts of violence,
but also making sure that we
find those who
carry out such acts and bring
them to justice,
we all have a role to play as
citizens in
making sure that we don't
succumb to that
fear.
GWEN IFILL: In the wake of the
attacks and
with hundreds of world leaders
converging
on the city, police and
bomb-sniffing dogs
swarmed New York's Penn Station
today.
In addition, 1,000 National
Guardsmen have
been deployed on the streets of
New York City.
Rahami underwent surgery earlier
today.
He was shot in the leg during
and the arm
during the shoot-out with
police.
We will have more on the
investigation right
after the news summary.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In the day's
other news: The
president said there's no
connection between
the bombings in New York and New
Jersey and
the stabbings at a Minnesota
mall.
Ten people were wounded in the
Saturday night
incident.
The Islamic State claimed that
it inspired
the attacker, who was killed by
an off-duty
policeman.
He's identified as Dahir Adan, a
college student
from Somalia.
GWEN IFILL: The Syrian military
declared today
that a week-long cease-fire is
over, and within
hours, launched dozens of
airstrikes.
The U.N. confirmed a
humanitarian aid convoy
was attacked, and opposition
activists said
it was hit by Russian or Syrian
planes.
In New York, Secretary of State
John Kerry
refused to concede the truce is
dead.
JOHN KERRY, U.S. Secretary of
State: The Russians
need to control Assad, who
evidently is indiscriminately
bombing, including on
humanitarian convoys.
So let's wait and see.
We will collect the facts.
We need to see where we are, and
then we will
make a judgment.
GWEN IFILL: Activists said the
various airstrikes
killed more than 30 people,
including a dozen
in the aid convoy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: U.S. airstrikes
may have accidentally
killed at least eight police
officers in Afghanistan.
An Afghan commander says it
happened Sunday
near Tirin Kot, the capital of
Uruzgan Province.
The U.S. military confirms
planes carried
out an airstrike there aimed at
Taliban forces.
GWEN IFILL: In Russia,
supporters of President
Vladimir Putin won a landslide
in Sunday's
parliamentary elections.
The United Russia bloc took
three-quarters
of the seats in the Lower House
of Parliament.
The party will have enough votes
to pass constitutional
amendments on its own.
Turnout was down sharply from
the last election
in 2011.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Scientists now
say the haze
from forest fires in Indonesia
may have led
to the deaths of more than
100,000 people.
That is based on new analysis of
mortality
data.
The fires were used to clear
land and burned
for weeks last year.
Researchers at Harvard and
Columbia universities
say most of the deaths occurred
in Indonesia,
Singapore and Malaysia.
GWEN IFILL: Signs of progress
today against
the Zika outbreak in Miami,
Florida.
Health officials dropped their
warning to
pregnant women to avoid the
city's Wynwood
arts district.
They credited aerial spraying of
the mosquitoes
that transmit the virus.
JUDY WOODRUFF: For the first
time, federal
prosecutors say New Jersey
Governor Chris
Christie knew a bridge was being
closed to
punish a political foe as it was
happening.
The governor denies that, but
the prosecutors
say a witness will so testify at
the trial
of two Christie allies.
It opened today.
A defense lawyer called the
witness -- quote
-- "a habitual liar."
GWEN IFILL: And Wall Street was
mostly uninspired
today.
The Dow Jones industrial average
lost three
points to close at 18120.
The Nasdaq fell nine points, and
the S&P 500
slipped a fraction of a point.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
a deeper
look at what we know about the
bombings in
New York and New Jersey; the
presidential
candidates' respond to the
attacks; U.N. leaders
search for solutions to the
world's refugee
crisis; and much more.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We return now to
the attacks
in New York and New Jersey.
With the capture of a man
suspected of planting
bombs in both states over the
weekend come
new questions about the terror
threat and
stopping radicalization in this
country.
Joining us now to address them,
Juliette Kayyem.
She's a former U.S. Department
of Homeland
Security official, and she's
author of the
book "Security Mom: An
Unclassified Guide
to Protecting Our Homeland."
And Lorenzo Vidino, he's the
director of the
Program on Extremism at George
Washington
University's Center for Cyber
and Homeland
Security.
And we welcome both of you to
the program.
Lorenzo, let me start with you.
What do you make of this man
Ahmad Khan Rahami
and what he did?
LORENZO VIDINO, George
Washington University:
Well, we don't know a lot of
facts at this
point.
I think most indications point
to the fact
that he had some kind of
political motivation.
I think -- is talking about
terrorism.
We don't know much about his
radicalization.
I think we're getting tidbits
here and there
of visits to Afghanistan, which,
per se, don't
necessarily mean much because
he's of North
African descent.
He did a mini-terror campaign,
if you look
at the tactic, the use of
pressure cookers.
It's something that al-Qaida and
al-Qaida
sympathizers used in the past.
The targets seem to have some
political motives,
a certain neighborhood in New
York, the Marine
Corps marathon.
We don't know much.
I think we're starting to get a
picture of
somebody that had some signs of
radicalization.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Juliette Kayyem,
what do you
make of this, the sophistication
of it, how
he carried it out?
JULIETTE KAYYEM, Former
Department of Homeland
Security Assistant Secretary:
Well, not very
sophisticated in terms of the
pressure cooker.
How to make it can be found
online and the
different elements of it are
pretty rudimentary.
He did make a large quantity of
them, but
just to remind viewers, if all
of these incidents
are connected, he had about a 25
percent success
rate.
And so what I'm curious about
is, how quick
was that radicalization process,
that, you
know, was this over three months
and he figured
it out how to do it quickly, or
is it over
two years and there were a
number of people
involved in the action?
I think that that is going to be
relevant
to determine whether it's just
him, him and
another person, or a larger
network.
So I wouldn't close anything off
yet solely
based on the materials or the
bombs.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Lorenzo Vidino,
what kind of
work needs to be done now to
figure out if
others were involved?
LORENZO VIDINO: Well, first of
all, his connections
overseas and his connections
domestically.
Authorities are all over social
media and
obviously are going to figure
out his contacts,
if he had Facebook profile,
Twitter account,
who he was talking to, his cell
phone.
I think the most immediate is
his contacts
here in the States.
The assumption is, I think, is
that there
are no contacts trying to plan
follow-up attacks,
but that's obviously not a
guarantee.
We don't know for sure, so,
trying to see
people who are immediately with
touch with
him in the United States, then
if he had contacts
overseas, if he had that was
somehow directing
him or at least aware of what he
was doing
overseas.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Juliette, what do
you make
of the fact that we learned late
this afternoon
his family moved to the United
States in 1995?
We figured he would have been 7
years old
then.
So, he grew up in this country
in that New
Jersey community, did travel
back to the region,
we believe, the last few years.
But what does that add up to?
JULIETTE KAYYEM: It adds up to
that we don't
necessarily have an immigration
problem.
We have a citizen problem.
I mean, unless someone is
willing to say anyone
who's been naturalized here is
automatically
suspect, most of these men are
U.S. citizens.
But the good news is, it's a
very small percentage
of the Islamic community so far.
So, what we need to look at
isn't so much
-- is maybe what happened when
he traveled
abroad.
We know there's a couple of
trips.
There's also some discussion of
a potential
of a marriage that he may have
had, so we
need to look at the process of
the review
process, the interview process
when he returned,
returned from Afghanistan, but
also the radicalization
process at home or online.
And so this investigation will
look very familiar,
because they will be talking to
friends and
family of his, and then there
will be, you
know, basically the online
footprint review,
who was he talking to online,
was there encrypted
information, to get a better
picture of who
he is and, of course, the most
important thing,
the radicalization process.
That's the only way we will stop
it from happening
in the future.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Lorenzo, friends
of his describe
him as growing more serious,
more religious
after he came back from one of
these or I
guess all of these trips to
Afghanistan.
What does it take to put
somebody on a terrorist
watch list?
LORENZO VIDINO: Well, it's
obviously not becoming
more religious.
That's something that cannot by,
in itself,
lead authorities to profile and
say just because
somebody has become more
conservative in his
views, more religious, that he
can be seen
as a security threat.
That element, together with
other elements
much more operational, can lead
authorities
to put somebody on the radar
screen or on
some kind of watch list.
It's obviously very difficult.
In many cases, we're talking
about just about
internal psychological
processes, which are,
at times, put online.
Many other cases, they're not.
So, it's very, very difficult
for authorities,
if there are no connections, no
communications,
to really know that somebody is
of interest
and potentially dangerous.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Juliette,
what can be done
in these circumstances?
As Lorenzo just said, just
because someone
becomes more religious doesn't
mean that they
are automatically considered
suspicious.
JULIETTE KAYYEM: And Lorenzo is
exactly right.
And that's why people who have
been in government
or in homeland security really
talk about
the homeland security
enterprise, because
the idea that the government is
going to be
able to prevent all these things
from happening
is just a fiction.
And so that is why there has
been a tremendous
focus on outreach to Muslims and
Arab and
other communities to integrate
them into law
enforcement, to have the kind of
relationships
that are necessary.
In all of these cases -- and I'm
sure we will
find this in this case today --
but in all
previous ones, someone knew.
That person was not an FBI
agent.
It wasn't a surveillance -- some
guy in the
CIA surveying.
It was the ex-wife.
It was the wife.
It was the father.
And so at a time when
discussions are heated
about what to do about the
Islamic radicalization
problem, I think the better way
to think about
it is, it's not a problem and
actually to
integrate and assimilate with
these communities
is going to be the best way to
minimize the
threat that's sometimes coming
from those
communities.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What would you
add to that,
Lorenzo?
You and I have had this
conversation, I know,
after San Bernardino, after
Orlando, with
those incidents.
What more does it take to try to
anticipate
these things before they happen?
LORENZO VIDINO: I think the ugly
reality is
that some incidents are
impossible to prevent.
I think it's -- another illusion
is that we
can prevent anything.
Unless you completely militarize
a society,
which nobody is arguing that we
should, you
can prevent anything.
Juliette is perfectly right in
saying we should
work more with communities.
I think you can add a little
more resources
in terms of what we're doing
online, getting
also social media companies to
work more with
the government, again, fully
understanding
the balance of civil liberties
and First Amendment
with the need for security.
And, obviously, it's a very
difficult balance
to maintain there.
The reality I that not
everything can be prevented.
And I think that's very ugly to
say, but it's
the reality.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Just one last
question, Lorenzo.
What are the questions that you
have in mind
right now that you think
authorities are probably
going to be trying to get
answers to?
LORENZO VIDINO: I think it's the
contacts
in the community.
I think it's, who he was talking
to, did he
have a friend, was he part of a
study group?
Generally, what we see in terms
of radicalization,
even if we have lone wolves from
an operational
point of view, at times were
interactive with
other people both online and
offline.
And maybe only one person in
that little group
of five or six like-minded
individuals decided
to act.
But the others had the same kind
of mind-set.
Maybe they stopped one step
short of acting.
Will some of them act?
Was he talking to other people?
Maybe he wasn't.
But, if he were, I think it's
very important
to know who he was talking to.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Lorenzo Vidino,
Juliette Kayyem,
we thank you both.
LORENZO VIDINO: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, online,
follow everything
we know about the bombing so
far.
Plus, watch as science
correspondent Miles
O'Brien explores the difference
between a
pressure cooker bomb and a pipe
bomb.
GWEN IFILL: The attacks were
also the focus
on the campaign trail today, as
Hillary Clinton
GWEN IFILL: The attacks were
also the focus
on the campaign trail today, as
Hillary Clinton
and Donald Trump pushed to
convince voters
that they can keep Americans
safe.
John Yang reports.
JOHN YANG: With terror threats
suddenly center
stage, Hillary Clinton used her
years as secretary
of state to say she's ready to
handle national
security.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
I have sat at that table in the
Situation
Room.
I have analyzed the threats.
I have contributed to actions
that have neutralized
our enemies.
I know how to do this.
JOHN YANG: Donald Trump used
this weekend's
attacks to underscore a defining
theme of
his campaign.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
We have seen how failures to
screen who is
entering the United States puts
all of our
citizens, everyone in this room,
at danger.
So, let me state very, very
clearly, immigration
security is national security.
JOHN YANG: Both candidates also
tried to highlight
their foreign policy
credentials, Clinton
by meeting with Ukrainian
President Petro
Poroshenko and Japanese Prime
Minister Shinzo
Abe on the sidelines of the U.N.
General Assembly
in New York.
She and Trump are also to meet
separately
with Egyptian President Abdel
Fattah El-Sisi.
Meanwhile, Clinton and running
make Tim Kaine
campaigned separately on college
campuses.
Young voters were a key part of
the coalitions
that twice elected President
Obama, but, this
time around, Clinton is having
trouble winning
them over.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: Even if
you're totally
opposed to Donald Trump, you may
still have
some questions about me.
I get that, and I want to do my
best to answer
those questions.
JOHN YANG: Clinton has a light
campaign schedule
for the rest of the week, ahead
of the first
debate with Trump a week from
today.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm John
Yang.
GWEN IFILL: And with 50 days
left until Election
Day, we turn to Politics Monday
with Amy Walter
of The Cook Political Report and
Tamara Keith
of NPR.
Tam, let's talk about what the
candidates
had to say on the attacks.
First, we hear Hillary Clinton
trying to sound
knowledgeable and Donald Trump
strong.
Which of them wins the day on
days like today?
TAMARA KEITH, National Public
Radio: And this
is really a microcosm of the
campaign.
Donald Trump comes out and he
says things
that are big and bold and in
some ways controversial,
saying maybe we need to bring
back profiling
and profiling at mosques
possibly, and says
that ISIS wants Hillary Clinton
to win.
Meanwhile, Hillary Clinton comes
out and says,
I was in the Situation Room, I
have all these
plans, I have got a plan for
ISIS.
And this is the way the campaign
goes, you
know, day after day after day.
GWEN IFILL: And yet, Amy, you
write this week
and when Hillary Clinton trips
and falls,
stumbles, it's because she's
encountering
headwinds of her own making.
AMY WALTER, The Cook Political
Report: Yes,
I think that this race right now
is coming
down to the structural
advantages that Hillary
Clinton has, but she has some
enthusiasm problems.
Donald Trump is trying to face
off the structural
disadvantages.
And unpacking that, what I mean,
is, yes,
she's had a very week, and -- or
actually
maybe a week-and-a-half.
GWEN IFILL: Couple weeks, yes.
AMY WALTER: Yes, couple weeks.
GWEN IFILL: Couple weeks.
AMY WALTER: Whether it was her
off-the-cuff
statements at the fund-raiser
about basket
of deplorables, whether it was
her health
scare and the sort of not being
up front about
what it really was, but also
that Donald Trump
himself has not given her much
fodder over
the last few weeks.
He has been much more
disciplined.
And you're seeing Republicans
starting to
come home and getting more
enthusiastic about
him than they were when the
focus was on his
self-inflected wounds.
Now that the focus is on her
inflected wounds,
you're seeing that diminishment
of enthusiasm
from her supporters.
And Tamara has talked about this
as well,
the young voters.
That's who Hillary Clinton was
talking to
up in Philadelphia today.
Clearly, she's got a problem in
getting those
voters who supported Barack
Obama, who don't
like Donald Trump.
But right now, they are
splitting their votes
between Hillary Clinton and the
third-party
candidates.
GWEN IFILL: Tam, I read
somewhere today -- perhaps
this is you -- that in fact part
of the reason
for her problem with millennials
is because
they see her as kind of a hawk.
TAMARA KEITH: That is one issue.
And, of course, news like today
doesn't necessarily
help with that, because then
she's talking
about her time in the Situation
Room, where
she was one of the people
encouraging the
president to go for it with the
bin Laden
raid.
Of course, that turned out in a
way that is
a positive story for her.
I spent a lot time today on the
Temple University
campus today talking to college
students and
recent grads about Hillary
Clinton.
And I met one Trump supporter.
Everyone else who I talked to is
sort of in
the camp of, well, I guess I'm
with her, which
is the challenge.
She needs to find a way to get
them a little
more enthusiastic.
Instead, there was a lot of,
well, I'm more
afraid of the other guy.
I heard that a lot, a lot of
lesser of two
evils type of talk.
GWEN IFILL: There is no
question, Amy, that
there is an enthusiasm gap.
This is now well-documented in
all these polls.
But why is it that when it
seemed -- it's
perceived that Hillary Clinton
has stumbled,
she immediately pays a price in
the polls,
and when it's perceived that
Donald Trump
has stumbled, as when he
suggests that maybe
the Secret Service could drop
their guns and
see what happens, Hillary
Clinton's Secret
Service, he doesn't seem to pay
that same
price?
AMY WALTER: Though I would
argue, though,
when the focus is on either one
of them and
the things that they have said
that become
much more controversial, that
you will see
the polls move up and down.
When the focus was on Donald
Trump and his
attacks on the judge who is
overseeing the
Trump University case and his
Mexican heritage,
you saw the numbers spike up, he
went down,
she went up.
When you saw after the
Republican debate,
where the focus -- I mean, not
the Republican
debate -- the Republican...
GWEN IFILL: Convention.
AMY WALTER: ... Convention --
thank you -- where
the focus was all anti-Hillary
Clinton, you
saw her numbers go down.
After her bad week with the FBI
director coming
out, her numbers went down.
When he made the focus about the
Gold Star
family, his numbers went down.
GWEN IFILL: So, there is an
actual...
AMY WALTER: It's actual -- this
is a crazy
race.
Both of these candidates have
decided to make
the race a referendum on the
other person,
the other person being worse.
So, when that spotlight focus on
your opponent,
and you say, see, look how
terrible they are,
your side gets excited.
But when it comes to you, then
the other side
gets excited.
GWEN IFILL: Tam, let me read to
you something
the president said at a
fund-raiser in New
York last night about Hillary
Clinton.
He said: "We as a society still
grapple with
what it means to see powerful
women.
And it still troubles us in a
lot of ways,
unfairly," basically playing the
gender card
that Hillary Clinton has made a
part of her
stump speech.
TAMARA KEITH: Yes.
And he goes on to say that if
this race is
tight, it's not because of
Hillary Clinton's
flaws.
I think that, back to what Amy
is talking
about, there's also how the two
candidates
are judged.
Hillary Clinton is judged as a
politician,
as someone who's been in public
life, who
is careful, who is measured, who
gives a lot
of speeches, who is a
politician.
And Donald Trump is often judged
on the standard
of someone who hasn't been a
lifelong politician,
someone who's new to public
life, who has
done reality TV and has been an
entrepreneur.
And the president labels that
sexism.
Other people label it other
things.
There is a dynamic there that is
-- it's there.
GWEN IFILL: And actually the
campaign is happy
to label it sexism as well, as
far as I can
tell.
But let me give -- take an
example of something
that we talked a lot about
today.
The president was at the U.N.
General Assembly,
a lot of conversation about
refugees and about
what the U.S. responsibility
should be to
refugees, especially from Syria.
And, once again, we're back at
the dichotomy
we saw at the beginning,
toughness vs. empathy,
I suppose.
And I wonder, does that -- does
the way these
two candidates -- do the way
that these two
candidates respond tell us
something, Amy?
AMY WALTER: Well, Hillary
Clinton definitely
wants to make this race a
referendum on temperament.
And Donald Trump wants to make
it a referendum
on change, and big, bold change.
Now, the country itself is sort
of torn.
It is, I think, slightly leaning
toward change,
this idea of, after eight years
of one president
and the anxiety that a lot of
Americans are
feeling about the status quo,
wanting to sort
of shake things up.
But they're nervous about what
that would
look like.
So, he wants to definitely keep
that focus
on shaking it up, being the big
and bold candidate.
Her only option is to say that
big and bold
is too dangerous, and so
stability is the
answer, because she's not the
big and bold
candidate.
She's not the new candidate.
And she's not the change
candidate.
GWEN IFILL: Well, Tam, we know
for sure that
the alleged suspect in today's
-- in yesterday's
-- the weekend's bombings is not
a refugee,
but he is -- was a nationalized
citizen from
elsewhere.
And I wonder if that elsewhere,
the opposite,
makes it difficult for Hillary
Clinton to
defend?
TAMARA KEITH: Well, I think that
it is a challenge
for her because, you know, she
talks about
vetting and we need good vetting
of people
who come to this country.
And often her plans that she
talks about are
not quite as satisfying as sort
of a Trumpian,
well, we're going to fix this
and -- or we're
going to blow them out of
whatever, or -- the
things that she says, because
she, you know,
has been part of the Obama
administration
just generally, you know, don't
have the same
splash as what Donald Trump
would say.
GWEN IFILL: Yes.
Go ahead.
AMY WALTER: And I would also say
who -- where
you sit is -- determines how
feel about these
issues.
This was a Quinnipiac poll.
Are you concerned about being a
victim of
terrorism? Trump supporters, 68
percent said
yes.
Clinton supporters, 29 percent
believe they
are going to be a victim of
terrorism.
So, they both are also speaking
to their base.
GWEN IFILL: And if vetting is a
solution,
how do you vet someone who came
to this country
at 7 years old?
So many questions.
But we're done with them for
this week on
Politics Monday.
Tamara Keith, Amy Walter, thank
you both very
much.
TAMARA KEITH: You're welcome.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": a
writer's take
on why he says the U.S.
political system has
devolved into chaos; and what it
will take
to modernize the world's largest
library.
But first: At the United Nations
General Assembly
today, a first-of-its kind
summit on refugees
and migrants was held, led by
the secretary-general,
Ban Ki-Moon.
Tomorrow, President Obama will
lead a second
meeting on the crisis.
William Brangham has more.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: An estimated
65 million
people worldwide are now
considered refugees
and migrants.
That's an increase of five
million people
over last year alone, making
this the largest
refugee crisis since World War
II.
To discuss the plight of these
people, and
the current global response, I'm
joined now
by Filippo Grandi.
He's the United Nations high
commissioner
for refugees.
Mr. High Commissioner, thank you
very much
for being here.
I understand today you reached a
big agreement
at the United Nations.
Can you tell us a little bit
about what was
agreed to?
FILIPPO GRANDI, United Nations
High Commissioner
for Refugees: Yes.
The General Assembly, meaning
all the states
in the world, have issued a
declaration which
actually will be known as the
New York Declaration,
committing themselves to
protecting, assisting
refugees, but also finding new
ways the organize
better the response to refugee
crisis.
And, you know, for a long time,
we have struggled
with the resources.
We have been able to give the
basics to refugees,
like blankets, medicine, some
food, but what
refugees want also is a future,
is education,
is jobs.
And it is an effort to try to
expand our support
to them that this declaration
will help us
carry out.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Obviously, a
global agreement
of this kind is important, but
this agreement
is not binding on any of the
nations that
put their name on the line.
So, how confident are you that
this will really
have a meaningful impact?
FILIPPO GRANDI: Well, first of
all, it's the
first time in history that the
General Assembly
issues such a declaration, so
there is a lot
of political weight behind that.
And then I think that, also,
everybody has
realized -- especially when
refugees in the
last couple of years started
arriving in Europe,
started moving on from places
where they have
arrived first, I think there is
a realization
this is not a problem of one or
another country.
This is a global problem.
Just like -- think of epidemics
or think of
climate change.
I think there is a growing
realization that
these are global issues, global
problems that
affect the whole of humanity,
and only working
together we can address the root
causes, we
can address what pushes people
to move on.
So I think that there is a
necessity and not
just a moral commitment to do
that.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: I want to ask
you a little
bit about some of the headwinds
that are facing
the U.N. and all the nations who
are grappling
with this.
We saw in Germany a very big
welcome mat thrown
out, and now we have seen the
rise of a far-right
nationalistic party in response.
Here in the U.S., we have also
seen a very
strong anti-immigrant sentiment,
driven mostly
out of fears of terrorism.
I'm curious.
When you're talking to leaders
of world nations,
what do you tell them about
those sentiments?
How do we counter those, and
where do those
feelings lead?
FILIPPO GRANDI: I think there
are always two
sentiments in every society.
There is solidarity.
And we have seen it very much in
Europe when
refugees arrive.
But there is also a feeling of
apprehension
and rejection.
And what people are, I think,
worried about
is when they see that the
response to these
flows is not orderly, is not
organized, is
not structured.
This is why this declaration
also invites
everybody, all the states,
together with the
United Nations organization, to
work on these
responses, to make them more
predictable,
more cooperative.
If Europe had reacted in that
manner back
last year, when people started
arriving in
large numbers, I'm persuaded
that there wouldn't
have been such a negative
reaction growing
with the passage of time, that
people would
have accepted that it was
important, necessary,
principled, but also possible to
receive refugees,
to give them asylum, people
fleeing from war
and persecution.
But we need to organize that
response better.
And this is what -- this is the
value of this
declaration.
It will help us work towards
that organization.
It will give us the resources
hopefully to
do that.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The issue of
resettlement
is obviously a crucial one,
finding a more
permanent home for these people,
so they're
not living in camps in
perpetuity.
But the agreement today that was
-- the original
draft of that agreement asks for
a 10 percent
annual rate of resettlement of
the refugees,
but that was scrapped because of
resistance
from many of the donor nations.
So, if 10 percent per year
resettlement is
considered too much, what does
that tell you
about the future?
FILIPPO GRANDI: This is a United
Nations document.
To issue this document, member
states have
to agree, all of them, 193.
This is very difficult.
So, there couldn't be an
agreement on a percentage
of refugees to be resettled.
But resettlement as a key
solution, especially
for the most vulnerable people,
is in the
declaration as one of the things
that we need
to work on.
So, the declaration is the
preamble to a global
compact that we hope we will be
able to issue
in two years' time.
And during this time, we will
work.
We will work on these concrete
commitments.
I don't know if we will come up
with a figure,
but I think that what we must do
is increase
the present very low percentage.
We are talking about 10 percent.
Right now, it's less than 1
percent of the
refugees that are resettled.
So we need to improve on that.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Just very
quickly, I'm curious
about the financial status of
your organization.
We saw requests go out last year
for $20 billion,
and only half of that was
returned.
How able are you financially to
deal with
this crisis going forward this
year and into
the years into the future?
FILIPPO GRANDI: This has been a
chronic problem
for us humanitarian
organizations.
UNHCR, my organization, has a
budget of $7
billion, in fact, annually, and
we receive
about 50, 55 percent of this
money.
Once again, this is another
important element
of what was decided in New York
today.
It was decided that the response
to refugee
flows shouldn't simply be
humanitarian, should
involve big development actors,
like the World
Bank, who made very strong
commitments today.
And that will bring new, fresh
resources,
different resources to the
table.
And I hope that that will also
be a big progress.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All right,
Filippo Grandi,
U.N. high commissioner for
refugees, thanks
very much for being here.
FILIPPO GRANDI: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Almost everyone
agrees American
politics has become more chaotic
in recent
years, that it's changed, and
not always for
the better.
Scholar Jonathan Rauch has a
theory about
why, and he shares it in a
recent article
for "The Atlantic" magazine.
JONATHAN RAUCH, "The Atlantic":
The article
is about what I call chaos
syndrome.
And that is the steady decline
in the ability
of the political systems to
organize itself
whether in campaigns, or in
government.
People think that politics just
somehow magically
organizes itself.
It doesn't work that way.
You need to assemble these huge
coalitions
of 535 politicians on Capitol
Hill, and tens
of thousands of interest groups,
and tens
of millions of voters, and
assemble all those
in government to get stuff done.
That requires a lot of middlemen
and a lot
of people in between doing a lot
of bargaining
and negotiation.
You cut those people out, you
get chaos.
What we have done over the last
40 or 50 years
is systematically attacked and
weakened the
parties, the political machines,
the professionals,
and insiders, and hacks, and all
the tools
that they use to get politicians
to play well
together.
And with those gone, you get
chaos.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What was it that
worked about
what you see as the kind of
ideal or close-to-ideal
political system in this
country?
JONATHAN RAUCH: Starting in,
really, the very
beginning of the republic, we
began building
parties with political machines
and hierarchies
and things like seniority
systems on Capitol
Hill.
So, there were people to call
when you had
to get stuff done.
And if Judy needed Jonathan to
vote on a bill
in Congress to keep the
government open or
raise the debt limit or do
something for the
team, Judy could call me up and
say, you know,
if you do that, you're going to
get money
for your campaign, you're going
to have an
easy reelection campaign, you're
going to
get that extra runway for the
airport in your
district, we're going to be able
to make this
deal behind closed doors.
You could do all that stuff.
Virtually all of that stuff now
is difficult
or impossible.
And all you can do is beg me,
and I say, why
should I do any of that?
It's just going to get me in
trouble in my
district.
Here we are.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Why were those
transactional
relationships important to make
government
work, to make politics work in
this country?
JONATHAN RAUCH: The transactions
allow for
compromise.
And compromise is what it's got
to be all
about when you're governing,
because no one
is ever going to have a big
enough majority
to just do what they want to do
all the time.
Well, to get people to
compromise, you have
to give them stuff.
A famous example of this, but
far from the
only one, is the 1964 civil
rights bill, only
passed because Lyndon Johnson
bought support
from Republicans.
He went to them and said, what
do you need
to put this bill through?
And the Republican leader in the
House, a
man by the name of Charlie
Halleck, said,
well, how about a big fat
research grant for
my district in Indiana?
LBJ said done.
Halleck said done.
That bill went through.
REP.
CHARLIE HALLECK (R), Indiana:
God damn it,
did I help you on civil rights?
LYNDON BAINES JOHNSON, President
of the United
States: Yes, you sure did.
And you helped yourself, because
you all want
civil rights as much as we do.
I believe it's a nonpartisan
bill.
I don't think it's a Johnson
REP.
CHARLIE HALLECK: Oh, no, no, no.
You're going to get all the
political advantage.
LYNDON BAINES JOHNSON: No, no,
no, no.
REP.
CHARLIE HALLECK: We aren't going
to get a
God-damned thing.
JONATHAN RAUCH: Is that
dishonorable?
No, it's politics.
Is it pretty?
But that's the kind of lubricant
that you
need to give people incentives
to work together.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And all of this
entails a measure
of secrecy behind closed doors,
smoke-filled
rooms.
JONATHAN RAUCH: Smoke-filled
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we have come
to believe
in this country, by 2016, that
transparency
is good, that we need to know
everything,
open books, open doors.
JONATHAN RAUCH: Yes, put them in
the fishbowl.
And, of course, the problem with
that is,
if every negotiation is
conducted in public,
then the minute one person says,
well, what
if we try this, next thing you
know, the interest
groups have piled all in, and
the political
opponents have shot it to
pieces.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Fast-forward.
president Obama is in office,
and he's trying
to get his health care reform
legislation
proposal through.
JONATHAN RAUCH: Obama, of
course, campaigns
on sunshine.
We're going to have the whole
process be open
to the public.
He gets into office and
discovers it is not
possible to write a very
complicated piece
of legislation involving
hundreds, if not
thousands of interest groups,
and multiple
working parts.
You can't negotiate that in
public.
You will be shot to pieces on
day one.
So what does he do?
He goes behind closed doors, not
because he
wants to, but because he has to.
If you open the doors, the
negotiations often
die before they even start.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you're saying
he -- you
know, for him, it never would
have gotten
-- it barely passed, but it...
(CROSSTALK)
JONATHAN RAUCH: It wouldn't have
gotten done.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
We are done.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JUDY WOODRUFF: President Obama's
crowning
legislative achievement came
early in his
first term, in 2010.
Soon after, Democrats lost their
majority
in the House.
Then, in 2011, the president
attempted to
negotiate the so-called grand
bargain budget
bill with Republican House
Speaker John Boehner.
This time, the results were
different.
JONATHAN RAUCH: We were really
this close
to a very good budget deal in
which both parties,
and conservatives, and liberals,
were all
going to give something, and we
would have
substantially reduced long-term
deficits,
reduced entitlement spending,
raised taxes
some, the kind of package that
ultimately
pretty much everyone agrees
we're going to
have to do in order to solve our
long-term
fiscal problems.
The speaker of the House, John
Boehner, wanted
to do it, but he could not get
his own caucus
organized enough to back him up
on it.
And that's when I realized that
the groups
of obstructionists were now able
to basically
hold the system to ransom.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, in 2013, GOP
leaders could
not prevent their renegade
members from shutting
down the federal government.
JONATHAN RAUCH: No one wants it
to shut down,
including a lot of the people
who voted to
shut it down.
They were kind of hoping that
wouldn't happen.
Ted Cruz wanted to shut it down
because it
was good for his presidential
campaign.
SEN.
TED CRUZ (R), Texas: Do you like
green eggs
and ham?
JONATHAN RAUCH: So, John
Boehner, appearing
on the Leno show, and Leno says,
why did the
government shut down?
And Boehner says something
that's stuck in
my mind ever since:
REP.
JOHN BOEHNER (R-OH), Speaker of
the House:
A leader without followers is
simply a man
taking a walk.
JONATHAN RAUCH: This is the
speaker of the
House who no longer has enough
incentives,
enough tools, enough
organizational power
to get people to follow.
We don't have a crisis of
leadership in Washington,
Judy.
We have a crisis of
followership.
JUDY WOODRUFF: When did things
start to go
wrong, in your view?
I mean, when did the system that
was working
so great, with the patronage,
with pork, when
did it start to change?
JONATHAN RAUCH: Well, caveat, I
don't want
anyone to think it's just all
the golden age
and everything was perfect.
There were big problems with
every system,
and there always have been.
It's a question of
overcorrecting.
The needle went too far one way,
so we overcorrected
and went way too far in the
other, threw the
baby out with the bathwater.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Some of this must
have been
in reaction to Watergate, to
Vietnam, the
Pentagon Papers, the idea the
government lied
to the American people, so the
desire was
to fix that.
JONATHAN RAUCH: That and the
idealism of a
generation which was, in many
ways, to its
credit, very idealistic, and
said, well, surely
we can do it better than that.
They start passing a whole
series of reforms.
So, we moved to direct primary
elections.
We started reducing the role of
appropriations
committees.
We started tearing down the
seniority system
on Capitol Hill.
All of that begins in the '70s.
It accelerates and continues in
the '90s,
and it's going on to this day.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Moving toward, I
guess, what
some people would describe as
small-D democratic
politics, where more and more
people are involved?
JONATHAN RAUCH: Well, that was
the ideal,
but it didn't work out that way,
of course.
As you know, the number of
people who actually
vote in primaries is very small.
Donald Trump basically clinched
the nomination
with the support of about 12
percent of Republican
voters.
That's about it, because it
turns out that,
when you remove these
intermediaries, these
political professionals from the
system, who
you really empower are the small
minorities
of activists who are best
organized, and either
most passionate, or have the
narrowest parochial
interests, but you kind of turn
it over to
them.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And has that
happened in both
parties?
JONATHAN RAUCH: Yes.
Both parties are structurally
weak.
Look, Judy, this is the first
time in my life
-- and I'm 56 years old --
where, of the four
final finishers -- set aside
John Kasich -- three
of them were renegades who had
run as outsiders
and against their own party
structures, Bernie
Sanders, not even a Democrat,
Donald Trump,
in no meaningful sense a
Republican.
Ted Cruz shut down the
government, hurt his
own party, campaigned against
his own leadership.
Parties and political systems
used to be about
excluding renegades who would
never play well
with others in government.
Now it's actually systematically
screening
them in.
That's new.
I think it's very important for
my friends
who are Democrats who are kind
of thinking,
well, Hillary Clinton will win,
and then the
Republicans will get their act
together, problem
solved.
I say, no, Donald Trump didn't
cause chaos.
Chaos caused Trump.
There will be more coming
afterwards if we
don't re-empower politicians to
get organized
and work together.
GWEN IFILL: Finally tonight: The
14th librarian
of Congress was sworn in last
week to lead
one of the nation's oldest
institutions into
its next chapter.
Jeffrey Brown visited Carla
Hayden as she
began her new position.
JEFFREY BROWN: It is the largest
library in
the world.
Founded in 1800, with some 162
million items,
the Library of Congress in
Washington, D.C.,
is a repository of books, yes,
but also a
storehouse of history and
culture, filled
with recordings, photographs,
maps and manuscripts,
charged with preserving national
treasures
of all kinds.
The new librarian of Congress is
Carla Hayden.
Why did you want to take on this
job?
CARLA HAYDEN, Librarian of
Congress: It's
a librarian's dream.
And in the field, it's seen as a
job that
really epitomizes what libraries
can mean
and symbolize.
So, this library can really help
libraries
throughout the country show the
worth of a
library and a community.
JEFFREY BROWN: It's pretty
spectacular new
digs, though, for you.
Right?
CARLA HAYDEN: Well, it is quite
something.
It really makes you realize what
this library
symbolizes, to be at the seat of
government.
JEFFREY BROWN: While most of the
past 13 heads
of this historic institution
have come from
scholarly backgrounds, Carla
Hayden is a librarian
through and through, and a
strong advocate
for their continuing relevance.
She headed the Enoch Pratt Free
Library in
Baltimore since 1993, and before
that worked
for the Chicago Public Library,
a career coinciding
with enormous changes in
information technology.
CARLA HAYDEN: Technology has
such an impact
on libraries in the last 20
years, and the
last 10 years in particular.
The opportunity to make those
items available
online for everyone is daunting,
but also
exciting.
And it's a pivotal time to think
about what
could be done with technology.
JEFFREY BROWN: This is where the
library has
been hit with criticism, though,
in several
independent assessments, that it
has fallen
behind, has not modernized its
technology,
has not digitized much of its
collection.
Is that a fair assessment?
CARLA HAYDEN: It's an assessment
that I believe
reflects the fact that, with the
largest library
in the world, 162 million items,
that's a
pretty substantial amount of
material to digitize.
And there's a lot involved with
these rare
and unique materials.
JEFFREY BROWN: In the bowels of
the library,
we were shown part of that
effort, a scanner
that can photograph 200 pages an
hour, here,
a delicate Persian history book
dating to
1825.
But these are still initial
steps to make
more accessible a collection
said to stretch
over 863 miles of bookshelves.
In your life, in your career,
you have had
to defend libraries, right?
CARLA HAYDEN: Yes.
Yes.
I have had...
JEFFREY BROWN: Why should we
give you money,
right?
CARLA HAYDEN: Why should you
invest in a library,
especially a library building,
in the time
of the digital age?
What we found is a library's
place is even
more important.
There is a hunger in this
digital age to hear
authors together, to participate
in programs,
to just be in a place, a
community space.
JEFFREY BROWN: I asked Carla
Hayden if she
worries about the privatization
of digital
media from companies such as
Google.
CARLA HAYDEN: It can be a
public-private partnership,
and there's room and space for
everyone.
I get excited thinking about
those partnerships
and the opportunities.
There are so many items that are
not in the
copyright domain.
And people might not realize the
Library of
Congress manages the copyright
process for
the nation.
And you do have items that are
available to
be digitized that a partner
could help quite
a bit.
JEFFREY BROWN: You have also
been known as
a privacy advocate, right?
As the president of the American
Library Association
in 2003, you argued against some
aspects of
the Patriot Act.
Are you worried still about
government surveillance
of information, even what's
available at libraries,
government watching what people
read?
CARLA HAYDEN: Librarians were
called during
that time feisty fighters for
freedom, and
we were very proud of that
label.
We were just concerned that, at
that time,
when people were rightfully
concerned about
national security, that there
was a balance
with a person's right to know.
Just because you're interested
in what jihad
is doesn't mean you intend to
join.
JEFFREY BROWN: You don't think
Americans need
to be worried that, whether
they're checking
out a book, whether they're
going online to
search something?
CARLA HAYDEN: The safeguards are
there.
There are measures in place that
ensure that
at least the proper cause for
examining records
is in place.
And that was what we were
concerned about,
wide sweeps of records with no
indication
of intent.
JEFFREY BROWN: You look at the
country today,
and much discussion about the
divisions, politically,
culturally, economically.
What can you do about it in your
new position?
CARLA HAYDEN: Make information
free for all.
Health information is just about
the number
one thing that people go into
public libraries
and connect to public libraries
for.
They're also looking for
information about
things that can make their lives
better.
It's a great equalizer.
So, there's an opportunity for
the Library
of Congress to supplement what
is happening
and not happening in many public
and school
libraries.
JEFFREY BROWN: You are the first
woman to
have this job, the first
African-American
to have this job.
Do these things matter, and, if
so, how, especially
at the Library of Congress,
heading it?
CARLA HAYDEN: I'm really smiling
because of
Mr. Melvil Dewey, who so many
people know
as the pioneer in librarianship.
And in about 1876, he decided
that it might
be good to have women join the
profession,
because, as he said -- and I
love this quote
-- "They can endure pain with
fortitude, and
they can perform monotonous
tasks with patience."
(LAUGHTER)
CARLA HAYDEN: But, more
seriously, though,
being the first African-American
really resonates,
because, for so many years
during slavery,
slaves were forbidden to learn
how to read,
and some of the laws back then,
amputating
fingers, 40 lashes and more,
just to learn
to read.
So, to have an African-American
head up the
largest institution that
signifies knowledge
and information resonates with
me quite a
bit.
JEFFREY BROWN: Carla Hayden,
thank you very
much.
CARLA HAYDEN: Thank you.
JEFFREY BROWN: And good luck.
GWEN IFILL: A footnote to this
story: On Wednesday,
Hayden, the Library of Congress,
and the Carnegie
Corporation of New York will
present more
than 163,000 pages, books,
manuscripts, and
maps to the government of
Afghanistan.
It's a digitized archive that
goes back to
the 1300s.
And online, we have more from
Carla Hayden.
We asked her to pick the
children's book she
loves the most.
Hear her answer in a bonus video
on our Facebook
page, Facebook.com/NewsHour.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And a news update
before we
go.
Late today, prosecutors in New
Jersey charged
the suspect in this weekend's
bombing attacks
with attempted murder.
Ahmad Khan Rahami faces five
counts of attempted
murder of police officers in
connection with
the shoot-out that led to his
capture.
Federal prosecutors are still
weighing charges
over the bombings.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: And I'm Gwen Ifill.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening.
For all of us here at the "PBS
NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.
For all of us here at the "PBS
NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.